https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ministry_of_Defence_(India)
Ministry of Defence (India) - Wikipedia
Ministry of Defence (India)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Indian Executive Department
Ministry of DefenceFlag of the Ministry of DefenceSouth Block, Secretariat Building, New DelhiMinistry overviewFormed1776; 246 years ago (1776) (as Military Department)15 August 1947; 74 years ago (1947-08-15) (as Ministry of Defence)Preceding MinistryDepartment of Defence (1938–47)Jurisdiction Republic of IndiaHeadquartersSecretariat Building Raisina Hill, New Delhi28°36′50″N 77°12′32″E﻿ / ﻿28.61389°N 77.20889°E﻿ / 28.61389; 77.20889Coordinates: 28°36′50″N 77°12′32″E﻿ / ﻿28.61389°N 77.20889°E﻿ / 28.61389; 77.20889Employees1,443,921[1][2] (active personnel) (2016)
1,155,000[3] (reserve personnel) (2012)
398,422[4] (civilian) (2014)Annual budget₹525,166 crore (US$69 billion) (2022–23)[5]Minister responsibleRajnath Singh, Minister of DefenceDeputy Minister responsibleAjay Bhatt, Minister of State for DefenceMinistry executivesDr. Ajay Kumar, IAS, Defence SecretaryVacant, Chief of Defence Staff, Secretary, Department of Military AffairsGeneral Manoj Mukund Naravane, Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee (Acting)Subhash Chandra, IAS, Secretary (Defence Production)Sanjeevanee Kutty, IAS, Secretary (Ex-Servicemen Welfare)Dr. G. Satheesh Reddy, Secretary (Defence Research and Development)[6]Dr. G. Satheesh Reddy, Scientific Adviser to Defence Minister[7][8]Sanjiv Mittal, Financial AdvisorChild agenciesDepartment of DefenceDepartment of Defence ProductionDepartment of Defence Research and DevelopmentDepartment of Ex-Servicemen WelfareDepartment of Military AffairsDepartment of Defence FinanceNational Defence Law DivisionWebsitemod.gov.in
Politics of India
Federal government
Constitution of India
Law
Human rights
Indian Penal Code
Law enforcement
LegislatureParliament of India
Lok Sabha
Speaker Om Birla (BJP)
House Leader Narendra Modi (BJP)
Opposition Leader Vacant
Rajya Sabha
Chairman Venkaiah Naidu (BJP)
House Leader Thawar Chand Gehlot (BJP)
Opposition Leader Mallikarjun Kharge (INC)
Executive
President of India
Ram Nath Kovind (BJP)
Vice President of India
Venkaiah Naidu (BJP)
Prime Minister of India
Narendra Modi (BJP)
Union Council of Ministers
Cabinet secretary
Judiciary
Supreme Court of India
Chief Justice N. V. Ramana
Justices (List)
District Courts
Other tribunals
Elections
General elections
2009
2014
2019
State elections
2017
2018
2019
Political partiesNational coalitions
National Democratic Alliance (NDA)
United Progressive Alliance (UPA)
National parties
State parties
Federalism
State Government
Governors
Legislatures (List)
High Courts
Local government
India portal
Other countries
vte
The Ministry of Defence (MoD) (IAST: Rakshā Maṃtrālaya) is charged with coordinating and supervising all agencies and functions of the government relating directly to national security and the Indian Armed Forces.
The President of India is the ceremonial commander-in-chief of the armed forces of the country. The Ministry of Defence provides policy framework and resources to the armed forces to discharge their responsibility in the context of the defence of the country. The Indian Armed Forces (including Indian Army, Indian Air Force, Indian Navy) and Indian Coast Guard under the Ministry of Defence are primarily responsible for ensuring the territorial integrity of India.
At present, the undergoing new creation of National Defence University, for training of military officials and concerned civilian officials, will be administered and overseen by the Ministry. The Ministry organises and runs Republic Day celebrations and parade every year in January, hosting a chief guest. The Ministry has the largest budget among the federal departments of India and currently stands third in military expenditure in the world,[9][10][11] among countries of the world.[12]
Contents
1 History
1.1 Post independences changes
2 Organisation
2.1 Departments
2.2 Universities and institutes
2.3 Inter-services organisations
2.4 Integrated Defence Staff
2.5 Chiefs of Staff Committee
2.5.1 Composition
2.6 Role
3 Ministers
4 Senior officials
4.1 Defence Secretary, other senior officials and Scientific Adviser to Defence Minister
4.2 Civil services under MoD
4.3 Finance Division
4.4 Chiefs of the tri-services and Defence Staff
4.5 Vice Chiefs of the tri-services
5 Initiatives
5.1 SRIJAN portal
6 See also
7 References
8 External links
History[edit]
A Military Department was created in the Supreme Government of the English East India Company at Kolkata in the year 1776, having the main function to sift and record orders relating to the Army issued by various Departments of the Government of East India Company. The Military Department initially functioned as a branch of the Public Department and maintained a list of Army personnel.[13]
With the Charter Act 1833, the Secretariat of the Government of the East India Company was reorganised into four departments, each headed by a secretary to the Government.[13] The armies in the presidencies of Bengal, Bombay and Madras functioned as the respective presidency armies until April 1895, when the presidency armies were unified into a single Indian Army. For administrative convenience, it was divided into four commands: Punjab (including the North West Frontier), Bengal (including Burma), Madras and Bombay (including Sindh, Quetta and Aden).[13]
The supreme authority over the Indian Army was vested in the Governor General-in-Council, subject to the control of the Crown, which was exercised by the Secretary of State for India. Two members in the Council were responsible for military affairs. One was the Military Member, who supervised all administrative and financial matters. The other was the commander-in-chief who was responsible for all operational matters.[13] The Military Department was abolished in March 1906 and was replaced by two separate departments; the Army Department and the Military Supply Department. In April 1909 the Military Supply Department was abolished and its functions were taken over by the Army Department. The Army Department was redesignated as the Defence Department in January 1938. The Department of Defence became the Ministry of Defence under a cabinet minister in August 1947.[13]
Post independences changes[edit]
The functions of MoD which in 1947 was mainly logistic support to the armed forces, has undergone far reaching changes. In November 1962, following the 1962 war, a Department of Defence Production was set-up to deal with research, development and production of defence equipment. In November 1965, the Department of Defence Supplies was created for planning and execution of schemes for import substitution of requirements for defence purposes. These two Departments were later merged to form the Department of Defence Production and Supplies.
The Defence Minister, Rajnath Singh addressing an Atmanirbhar Bharat Defence Industry Outreach Webinar, jointly organised by the Society of Indian Defence Manufacturers (SIDM), the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and Department of Defence Production (DDP), Ministry of Defence (MoD), in New Delhi on 27 August 2020. Also seen are General Bipin Rawat, General Manoj Mukund Naravane, Admiral Karambir Singh, Air Chief Marshal R.K.S. Bhadauria, the Defence Secretary, Ajay Kumar, the Secretary (Defence Production) and the Secretary, Raj Kumar, Department of Defence R&D and Chairman, DRDO, G. Satheesh Reddy.
In 1980, the Department of Defence Research and Development was created. In January 2004, the Department of Defence Production and Supplies was renamed the Department of Defence Production. A Scientific Adviser to the Defence Minister was appointed to advise on scientific aspects of military equipment and the research and design of defence forces equipment. The Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare was created in 2004.[citation needed]
Organisation[edit]
Departments[edit]
The Ministry of Defence consists of five Departments; Department of Defence (DoD), Department of Military Affairs (DMA), Department of Defence Production (DDP), Department of Defence Research and Development (DRDO), and Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare (DESW). The Defence Secretary of India functions as head of the Department of Defence,[14][15] and is additionally responsible for coordinating the activities of the Departments in the Ministry.[14][15]
The principal functions of all the Departments are as follows:
The Department of Defence, headed by the Defence Secretary, the department deals with the defence of india including defence policy, preparation for defence, acts conducive to prosecution of war, the Reserves of the Army, Navy and Air Force, Defence Accounts, Indian Coast Guard, Border Roads Organization, capital acquisitions for defence and various establishment matters.[16][17] It is also responsible for the Institute for Defence Studies and Analysis, National Defence College and any other organisation within the Ministry of Defence whose remit is broader than military matters. It is also responsible for the Defence Budget, matters relating to the Parliament, defence cooperation with foreign countries and coordination of all activities.[14][15]
The Department of Military Affairs, is responsible for managing the armed forces of India, namely, the Army, the Navy and the Air Force. It is also responsible for the Territorial Army. It is headed by the Chief of Defence Staff as its secretary. It deals with procurement exclusive to the Indian Armed Forces except capital acquisitions. It is designed to promote jointness among the military services of India. This department was approved on 24 December 2019.[18][19] and the responsibilities notified by Cabinet Secretariat order on 30 December 2019.[20]
The Department of Defence Production, headed by the Defence Production Secretary, the department was set up in November 1962 and is responsible for matters pertaining to defence production, planning and control of departmental production units of the Ordnance Factories Board, indigenisation of imported stores equipment and spares, and for defence public sector undertakings (HAL, BEL, BEML, BDL, MDL, GSL, GRSE, Midhani).[15][21]
The Department of Defence Research and Development is headed by the Defence Research and Development Secretary and ex-officio chairperson of Defence Research and Development Organisation. The department was formed in 1958, after the three-way merger of Technical Development Establishment of the Indian Army, the Directorate of Technical Development and Production, and the Defence Science Organisation. The department is responsible for the Defence Research and Development Organisation.[15][22]
The Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare (DESW) is headed by the Ex-Servicemen Welfare Secretary. The department was set up in 2004 to look after veteran affairs. The Directorate General of Resettlement, the Kendriya Sainik Board and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme come under the purview of DESW.[15][23]
Universities and institutes[edit]
Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses, Defence Institute of Advanced Technology, Defence Institute of Psychological Research and National Defence University come under administration and purview of the Ministry of Defence.
Inter-services organisations[edit]
[15]
Officers Training Academy, Chennai & Gaya
Indian Military Academy, Dehradun
National Defence Academy, Pune
Rashtriya Indian Military College (R.I.M.C)
Rashtriya Military Schools (Chail, Belgaum, Banglore, Ajmer, Dholpur)
National Defence College, New Delhi
College of Defence Management, Secunderabad
Defence Services Staff College, Wellington Cantonment, The Nilgiris
Military Institute of Technology (MILIT), Pune
Armed Forces Medical College (India), Pune
Directorate General Resettlement, New Delhi
Directorate General of Defence Estates, New Delhi
Directorate of Public Relations
Canteen Stores Department
Army Purchase Organisation
Services Sports Control Board
National Cadet Corps
Directorate General Quality Assurance
Armed Forces Films and Photo Division
History Division, Ministry of Defence
Ministry of Defence Library
Border Roads Organisation
Strategic Information Services
Tactical Intelligence Division
Armed Forces Medical Services
Military Engineer Services
Integrated Defence Staff[edit]
Main article: Integrated Defence Staff
To ensure a high degree of synergy between the Armed forces, the Government has set up the Integrated Defence Staff, headed by the Chief of Integrated Defence Staff as the Chairman. It was created on 1 October 2001 based on the recommendations of the Group of Ministers which was set up in 2000 (post-Kargil) to review India's defence management.[24] It acts as the point organisation for integration of policy, doctrine, war-fighting and procurement by employing best management practices. The chairman of Integrated Defences Staff is a 4-star General (or his equivalent in the Air Force or the Navy).
The first Chief of Defence Staff was General Bipin Rawat, who took over on 1 January 2020.[25]
Chiefs of Staff Committee[edit]
"Chiefs of Staff are the authority for advising the Defence Minister and normally through him the Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs on all military matters which require ministerial consideration". The Integrated Defence Staff is '"the principal arm and Secretariat to the Chiefs of Staff Committee".[26][27]
Composition[edit]
The Chiefs of Staff Committee is composed of: (a) Chief of the Army Staff (COAS); (b) Chief of the Naval Staff (CNS); (c) Chief of the Air Staff (CAS); and (d) Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) (non-voting member). The Scientific Adviser to the Minister of Defence is invited to attend whenever needed.[26]
The senior most member of the COSC is appointed its chairperson. General Bipin Rawat was the last head of COSC.[28]
The position of COSC has ceased to exit with the creation of Chief of Defence Staff.
General Bipin Rawat was appointed the first Chief of Defence Staff in 2019. He died in a helicopter crash on 8 December 2021.
Role[edit]
The responsibility for national defence "rests with the Cabinet, which is discharged through the Ministry of Defence, which provides the policy framework and wherewithal to the Armed Forces to discharge their responsibilities in the context of the defence of the country. The Raksha Mantri (Defence Minister) is the head of the Ministry of Defence."[13]
The Defence Ministry is responsible for "obtaining policy directions of the Government on all defence and security related matters" and communicating these directions to "Services Headquarters, Inter-Services Organisations, Production Establishments and Research and Development Organisations".[13] The MoD works closely with the National Security Council, Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Ministers[edit]
MoD is headed by the Minister of Defence, who is supported by one, or more than one, minister of state.[13]
Minister
Designation
Portfolio
Rajnath Singh
Minister of Defence
Overall responsibility.
Ajay Bhatt
Minister of State for Defence
Charter of duties includes secondary logistic and administrative functions.
Senior officials[edit]
There are about 400,000 defence civilians, under the MOD including Ministry of Finance personnel attached to MOD. In 2015–16 Defence pension bill was ₹54,500 crore (equivalent to ₹670 billion or US$8.7 billion in 2020) of which about 36 per cent was on account of defence civilians.[66]
Defence Secretary, other senior officials and Scientific Adviser to Defence Minister[edit]
See also: Defence Secretary (India) and Defence Production Secretary
The ministers are supported by a number of civilian, scientific and military advisers.
The Defence Secretary as head of the Department of Defence,[14] is the senior most civil servant in the ministry and is responsible for coordinating the activities of the four departments in the ministry.[14] His/her role is to ensure that the MoD operates effectively as a department of the government.[29][30][14] Defence Secretary is assisted by additional secretaries and joint secretaries to Government of India posted in the ministry. The Defence Secretary, generally, is an officer from the Indian Administrative Service, apart from the Defence Secretary, there are three other secretary-level posts in the Ministry of Defence.
Scientific Adviser to Defence Minister plays a key role in formulation of research and development policies and promoting self-reliance in Indian defence industries.
Senior officials in the Ministry of Defence[31][32][33][34]
Name
Designation
Ajay Kumar, IAS
Defence Secretary
Subhash Garg, IAS
Secretary (Defence Production)
Sanjeevanee Kutty, IAS
Secretary (Ex-servicemen Welfare)
G. Satheesh Reddy[35]
Secretary (Defence Research and Development) and chairman, DRDO
Sanjiv Mittal, IDAS
Financial Adviser (Defence Services), Ministry of Defence
Apurva Chandra, IAS
Director General (Acquisition) and Additional Secretary
Subhash Chandra, IAS
Additional Secretary
Jiwesh Nandan, IAS
Additional Secretary (JN)
Barun Mitra, IAS
Additional Secretary (Defence Production)
Mala Dutt, IES
Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser (Acquisition)
Major General V. D. Vogra
Director General (Resettlement)
Major General Ashok Kumar
Managing Director, Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme
Major General H. S. Shanbhag
Technical Manager (Land Systems)
Rear Admiral R. Sreenivas
Technical Manager (Maritime and Systems)
Air Vice Marshal Vishwas Gaur, VM
Technical Manager (Air)
G. Satheesh Reddy
Scientific Adviser to Defence Minister
Civil services under MoD[edit]
Civil Services under the Ministry of Defence
S. No.
Name of service
Group
1
Indian Naval Material Management Service
A
2
Border Roads Engineering Service
A
3
Defence Aeronautical Quality Assurance Service
A
4
Defence Quality Assurance Service
A
5
Defence Research and Development Service
A
6
Indian Defence Accounts Service
A
7
Indian Defence Contract Management Service
A
8
Indian Defence Estates Service
A
9
Indian Defence Service of Engineers
A
10
Indian Naval Armament Service
A
11
Indian Ordnance Factories Service
A
12
Indian Ordnance Factories Health Service
A
13
Armed Forces Headquarters Civil Services
B
Finance Division[edit]
The Finance Division of the Ministry of Defence is headed by the Financial Adviser (Defence Services). He or she exercises financial control over proposals involving expenditure from the Defence Budget and is responsible for the internal audit and accounting of defence expenditure. In the latter tasks, he or she is assisted by the Controller General of Defence Accounts.
Chiefs of the tri-services and Defence Staff[edit]
In 1955, the title of Commander-in-Chief was abolished and the three service chiefs were designated as the Chief of the Army Staff, the Chief of the Naval Staff and the Chief of the Air Staff. The heads of the three services of Indian Armed Forces are:
Chief of Defence Staff — Vacant
Chief of the Army Staff —
General Manoj Mukund Narvane
Chief of the Naval Staff — Admiral Radhakrishnan Hari Kumar
Chief of the Air Staff — Air Chief Marshal Vivek Ram Chaudhari
Vice Chiefs of the tri-services[edit]
Vice Chief of the Army Staff — Lieutenant General Manoj Pande
Vice Chief of the Naval Staff — Vice Admiral Satish Namdeo Ghormade
Vice Chief of the Air Staff — Air Marshal Sandeep Singh
Initiatives[edit]
SRIJAN portal[edit]
The SRIJAN is a portal launched by MoD in order to take up the products imported for indigenization. According to Ministry; it displays defence products that have been imported recently and will tag with the Defence Public sector undertakings, Ordinance Factory Board and others in order to push for its domestic manufacturing for exports in future.[36]
See also[edit]
National Defence College (India)
Military Institute of Technology (MILIT), Pune
Defence Research and Development Organisation
Indian Naval Academy
Chief of Defence (India)
References[edit]
^ "Press Information Bureau". Archived from the original on 15 September 2016. Retrieved 15 September 2016.
^ "20% Sailor Shortage in Navy, 15% Officer Posts Vacant In Army, Nirmala Sitharaman Tells Parliament". 27 December 2017.
^ IISS 2012, pp. 243–248
^ "Report of the 7th Central Pay Commission of India" (PDF). Seventh Central Pay Commission, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2015. Retrieved 13 August 2017.
^ P, Rajat; Feb 1, it / TNN / Updated; 2022. "defence: Strong push for indigenous weapons amidst modest hike in defence budget | India News - Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 1 February 2022.{{cite web}}:
CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)
^ "Defence Secretary of R&D DRDO- Defence secretary R&D". Drdo.gov.in. Archived from the original on 15 May 2019. Retrieved 15 September 2018.
^ https://www.drdo.gov.in/drdo/English/index.jsp?pg=sa-to-rm.jsp[dead link]
^ "Defence Secretary of R&D DRDO". Drdo.gov.in. Retrieved 15 September 2018.
^ Behera, Laxman K. (2 February 2018). "Defence Budget 2018-19: The Imperative of Controlling Manpower Cost". Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses. Retrieved 19 February 2018.
^ Peri, Dinakar (1 February 2018). "Modest hike in defence budget, pensions see sharp rise". The Hindu. New Delhi. ISSN 0971-751X. OCLC 13119119. Retrieved 19 February 2018.
^ Pandit, Rajat (1 February 2018). "Budget 2018: Govt hikes defence budget by 7.81%, but it's just 1.58% of GDP & lowest since 1962". The Times of India. New Delhi. OCLC 23379369. Retrieved 18 February 2018.
^ Tian, Nan; Fleurant, Aude; Wezeman, Pieter D.; Wezeman, Siemon T. (April 2017). "Trends in World Military Expenditure, 2016" (PDF). Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. Retrieved 24 April 2017.
^ a b c d e f g h "ABOUT THE MINISTRY". Ministry of Defence, Government of India. Retrieved 14 January 2018.
^ a b c d e f "About DoD". Department of Defence, Government of India. Retrieved 10 January 2018.
^ a b c d e f g "Annual Report (2016-17)" (PDF). Ministry of Defence, Government of India. Retrieved 14 January 2018.
^ "Cabinet Secretariat Notification" (PDF). Gazette of India. 30 December 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2020.
^ "Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 (As Amended up to 31st January, 2017)" (PDF). Gazette of India. 31 January 2017. Retrieved 25 February 2020.
^ "Cabinet approves creation of the post of Chief of Defence Staff in the rank of four star General". Press Information Bureau. 24 December 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2019.
^ "Govt sets up Dept of Military Affairs to be headed by Chief of Defence Staff". Hindustan Times. 24 December 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2019.
^ "Cabinet Secretariat Notification" (PDF). Gazette of India. 30 December 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2020.
^ "About The DDP". Department of Defence Production, Government of India. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 22 January 2018.
^ "Genesis & Growth". Defence Research and Development Organization, Government of India. Retrieved 22 January 2018.
^ "About DESW". Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, Government of India. Retrieved 22 January 2018.
^ "About IDS > History". Integrated Defence Staff. Retrieved 14 January 2018.
^ "Lt Gen Satish Dua takes over as CISC". Press Information Bureau of India. 3 November 2016. Retrieved 14 January 2018.
^ a b "THE CHIEFS OF STAFF COMMITTEE". Integrated Defence Staff. Retrieved 14 January 2018.
^ "Welcome message from Chief of Integrated Defence Staff". Integrated Defence Staff. Retrieved 14 January 2018.
^ "Air Chief Marshal Dhanoa gets baton of COSC chief". The Hindu. 29 May 2019.
^ "ABOUT THE MINISTRY". Ministry of Defence, Government of India. Retrieved 15 January 2018.
^ "Who is Who: Organisation Structure and officers of the Ministry of Defence of Republic of India". Minister of Defence. Archived from the original on 11 March 2014. Retrieved 29 December 2011.
^ "Who's Who". Department of Defence, Ministry of Defence Government of India. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
^ "Who's Who". Department of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence, Government of India. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
^ "Who's Who". Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare, Ministry of Defence, Government of India. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
^ "Dr G. Satheesh Reddy, Secretary, Department of Defence R&D and Chairman, DRDO". Defence Research and Development Organisation, Department of Defence Research and Development, Ministry of Defence, Government of India. Archived from the original on 15 May 2019. Retrieved 29 October 2018.
^ "DRDO's new chief Satheesh Reddy has his job cut out".
^ "rajnath-singh-launches-online-portal-srijan-to-promote-indigenisation-in-defence-production". Retrieved 2 September 2020.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ministry of Defence (India).
Official Website Ministry of Defence, India
Official Website of Department of Defence Production
Official Website of Defence Research and Development Organisation
Annual Report for the year 2016-17
Defence Directory of Important Web Links of MOD
Official Website of the Integrated Defence Staff
Sainik Samachar Armed Forces News
vte Defence Ministry of IndiaForces
Indian Air Force
Indian Army
Indian Coast Guard
Indian Navy
Autonomous Bodies
Defence Research & Development Organisation
Indian Ordnance Factories
Public Sector Undertakings
BDL
BEL
BEML
GRSE
GSL
HAL
MDL
Midhani
Category
Army
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard
vte Government ministries of IndiaPresident (List) • Vice President (List) • Government of India • Prime Minister (List • Office) • Deputy Prime Minister • Council of MinistersCurrentKey
Defence
External Affairs
Finance
Home Affairs
Economy & Industry
Chemicals and Fertilizers
Civil Aviation
Commerce and Industry
Communications
Co-operation
Corporate Affairs
Electronics and Information Technology
Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises
Information and Broadcasting
Labour and Employment
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Mines
Steel
Textiles
Tourism
Infrastructure
Development of North Eastern Region
Jal Shakti
Ports, Shipping and Waterways
Railways
Road Transport and Highways
Rural Development
Housing and Urban Affairs
Food
Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying
Food Processing Industries
Energy & Climate Change
Coal
Environment, Forest and Climate Change
New and Renewable Energy
Petroleum and Natural Gas
Power
Science, Education & Health
AYUSH
Earth Sciences
Education
Health and Family Welfare
Science and Technology
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
General Administration
Culture
Law and Justice
Minority Affairs
Panchayati Raj
Parliamentary Affairs
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Planning
Social Justice and Empowerment
Statistics and Programme Implementation
Tribal Affairs
Women and Child Development
Youth Affairs and Sports
Defunct
Communications and Information Technology
Overseas Indian Affairs
Surface Transport
Drinking Water and Sanitation
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
Ministers
Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare
Defence
Education
External Affairs
Finance
Home Affairs
Law and Justice
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
Petroleum and Natural Gas
Railways
Steel
Secretaries
Cabinet
Defence
Finance
Foreign
Home
Personnel
Departments
Atomic Energy
Biotechnology
Higher Education
Official Language
Science and Technology (DST)
Military Affairs
Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade
Space
Telecommunication
vte Indian Armed Forces
Indian Army
Indian Navy
Indian Air Force
Leadership
President
Prime Minister
Minister of Defence
Defence Secretary
National Security Advisor
Chief of Defence Staff
Chief of the Army Staff
Chief of the Naval Staff
Chief of the Air Staff
Vice Chief of Defence Staff
Director General Armed Forces Medical Services
Serving generals
Serving admirals
Serving air marshals
OrganisationMinistry andCommittees/Councils
Ministry of Defence
Department of Military Affairs
Department of Defence Research and Development
Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare
National Security Council
Cabinet Committee on Security
Standing Committee on Defence
Defence Planning Committee
Nuclear Command Authority
Integrated Defence Staff
Defence Intelligence Agency
CommandsJoint
Integrated Theatre Commands
Andaman and Nicobar Command
Commander-in-Chief
Strategic Forces Command
Defence Cyber Agency
Defence Space Agency
Armed Forces Special Operations Division
Army
Central Command
Eastern Command
Northern Command
Southern Command
South Western Command
Western Command
Army Training Command
Navy
Western Naval Command
Eastern Naval Command
Southern Naval Command
Air Force
Central Air Command
Eastern Air Command
Southern Air Command
South Western Air Command
Western Air Command
Training Command
Maintenance Command
Other components
Indian Coast Guard
National Cadet Corps
Paramilitary forces
Special forces
Territorial Army
Border Roads Organisation
Personnel
Military Academies
Ranks and insignia
Army
Navy
Air Force
Coast Guard
Border Roads Organisation
Paramilitary forces
Awards and Decorations
OperationsWars
Indo-Pakistani wars
1947–1948
1965
Battle of Asal Uttar
Battle of Chawinda
1971
Naval War
Air War
Battle of Chamb
Operation Trident
Operation Cactus-Lilly
Battle of Longewala
Kargil War
Sino-Indian War
External Conflicts
Kashmir conflict
Korean War
Siachen conflict
Indo-Pakistani border skirmishes
Operation Parakram
2011
2013
2014–2015
2016–2018
2019
Balakot airstrike
Congo Crisis
Sino-Indian border skirmish
1987
Nathu La and Cho La clashes
Doklam standoff
2020
Indian intervention in the Sri Lankan Civil War
Operation Cactus
Evacuation of Indian civilians from Kuwait
Piracy off the coast of Somalia
Operation Raahat
Operation Devi Shakti
Indo-Myanmar border strike
Internal Conflicts
Annexation of Hyderabad
Operation Vijay
Annexation of Junagadh
Annexation of Dadra and Nagar Haveli
Northeast India insurgency
Punjab insurgency
Operation Blue Star
Operation Woodrose
Kashmir insurgency
Counter-insurgency operations in Kashmir
LOC surgical strike
Equipment
Defence Research and Development Organisation
Ordnance Factory Board
Ballistic missiles
Weapons of mass destruction
Army
List of equipment of the Indian Army
Navy
Active Ships
Historical Ships
Weapon Systems
Future
Air Force
Active Aircraft
Historical Aircraft
Future
Documents
Indian Maritime Security Strategy
Other topics
History
Women in Indian Armed Forces
Armed Forces Flag Day
Armed Forces Tribunal
Indian Armed Forces rank flags
Indian military bands
National War Memorial
Amar Jawan Jyoti
Category
Army
Navy
Air Force
Authority control
ISNI
1
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ministry_of_Defence_(India)&oldid=1084425444"
Categories: Ministry of Defence (India)Defence ministriesGovernment ministries of IndiaMilitary of IndiaHidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum argumentsCS1 maint: numeric names: authors listAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2022Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataUse Indian English from May 2014All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishUse dmy dates from December 2015Coordinates not on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2022Articles with hatnote templates targeting a nonexistent pageCommons category link from WikidataArticles with ISNI identifiers
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
ArticleTalk
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate
Contribute
HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file
Tools
What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Print/export
Download as PDFPrintable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Languages
বাংলাفارسیFrançaisहिन्दीಕನ್ನಡमराठी日本語ଓଡ଼ିଆਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiРусскийதமிழ்اردو中文
Edit links
This page was last edited on 24 April 2022, at 11:54 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.
By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement